Too many spaces, so there's room for people to come
NOTE CONF
in who are late.
All right, so the red light is on.
NOTE CONF
That means we're recording so we can get started with
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So welcome to Thrombi.
It's really great to see everyone.
NOTE CONF
I'm always quite excited at the beginning of this course
because I don't teach first semester, so I've not been
NOTE CONF
teaching since I'm from B last year.
So it's really nice just to see a whole bunch
NOTE CONF
of students and to start doing some, um, well, I
hope it's going to be interesting stuff with you.
NOTE CONF
So I really like this course.
Um, oh, we've got some more people coming in, so,
NOTE CONF
um, it's very full in here.
You're going to have to find there are there are
NOTE CONF
seats available, but people might have to budge up.
If you're sitting next to an empty space, can you
NOTE CONF
budge up a bit?
So the empty spaces are on the end?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, there's some down here.
There's about three, I think, down here and a couple
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is going to be really cosy.
Well I'm really happy to see so many people here
NOTE CONF
in person, which isn't always the way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
If you're sitting next to an empty space, can you
NOTE CONF
put.
Oh, do you guys have got to see you?
NOTE CONF
You're good.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Any more empty seats?
You're looking for seats.
NOTE CONF
There's.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's a seat over here.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Oh, there's one there too.
Okay, so hopefully we won't get two more people coming
NOTE CONF
in.
Uh, there should be enough spaces for everyone.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
Anyway, so I'm excited to start this course.
NOTE CONF
I hope that everybody's had a really good break, and,
um, is ready to feeling a bit energised and ready
NOTE CONF
to go.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can you put your hand up if you're near an
empty seat?
NOTE CONF
There's one down here.
Yeah, there's a few.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So this is this is in from B.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I like to put word clouds up to
begin to see how people are feeling.
NOTE CONF
People are feeling locked in and they're feeling Kanya and
Sigma.
NOTE CONF
I don't really know any of those things mean, but,
uh.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so normally in this we get a mix between
a quite an interesting insight into how people are actually
NOTE CONF
feeling and then all the like, nonsense words that people
really enjoy putting in these sorts of things, which is
NOTE CONF
fine.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So today is going to be a little bit of
a oh, no, actually, why don't we just start?
NOTE CONF
I just leave this up for now.
You can start voting on which I'm going to leave
NOTE CONF
my office out open.
You can vote on when you want the office to
NOTE CONF
be.
So it suits the most number of people.
NOTE CONF
But what we're going to be doing today is mostly
kind of add many stuff talking about how the course
NOTE CONF
is going to work, making sure that everybody's set up
with everything they need to be set up with.
NOTE CONF
Um, and can you put your hand up if you're
near an empty space?
NOTE CONF
There's one over there, actually.
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
You're good.
Um, and make sure everybody's on the right track.
NOTE CONF
So there's a lot of moving parts in and from
B, there's also quite a lot of, um, stuff you
NOTE CONF
need to have installed.
So how many people here have worked through the Getting
NOTE CONF
Started materials.
Put your hands up.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Quite a few.
NOTE CONF
That's great, but quite a few haven't.
That's also completely fine.
NOTE CONF
So in order to do in front be, you need
to work through the Getting Started materials, which are available
NOTE CONF
on the course website.
So let's start off by having a look at the
NOTE CONF
course website and just getting you oriented.
So like a lot of courses now we have two
NOTE CONF
different sites.
This is super annoying.
NOTE CONF
This is how we have to do it because we
want to make our materials available, but we're not allowed
NOTE CONF
to make learn available.
So we have to have a learn page with the
NOTE CONF
assessment in.
We can't put the assessment on open course because it's
NOTE CONF
too open.
But all the materials are on on open course.
NOTE CONF
So if you go to open course everybody should be
familiar with this.
NOTE CONF
This is where most this is mostly what we use.
But you will need to go to learn for assessment
NOTE CONF
primarily.
And also this has got the technical things.
NOTE CONF
And like the like the coursework planner.
You can get all the information on assessment here.
NOTE CONF
But most of the materials are on the open course
page.
NOTE CONF
So this tells you a little bit about what Thrombi
is all about.
NOTE CONF
Now the important thing that I want to share with
you is that this is about software engineering.
NOTE CONF
This is a kind of like beginning to think about
how you code from a kind of more of a
NOTE CONF
software engineering point of view.
So, yeah, so it's not really a software engineering course,
NOTE CONF
but we're trying to develop those skills that are going
to help you improve in that way.
NOTE CONF
So it's all about coding.
It's all about learning to code.
NOTE CONF
But it's not just about hacking out code that works.
It's about learning how to write good code, and it's
NOTE CONF
about learning how to communicate about code.
And all of these things are really important.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a huge mix of experiences.
Some of you will have done advanced higher or or
NOTE CONF
A-level, maybe doing Java as part of that, and we'll
know most of what's in this course, probably not all
NOTE CONF
of it.
And I would still encourage you to stay focussed, if
NOTE CONF
that's you, because you might learn approaches and techniques that
you don't already know, but you may know a lot
NOTE CONF
of it.
Others of you haven't done any Java or any object
NOTE CONF
or object oriented programming.
Some of you have never done any coding at all
NOTE CONF
before last semester.
That's also common.
NOTE CONF
And then a lot of you in the middle.
So it's designed to suit all.
NOTE CONF
All of you obviously that's really difficult.
If you haven't done any coding before.
NOTE CONF
It is quite a steep learning curve.
You will have a lot to do and keeping up
NOTE CONF
to speed is really important with that.
If you've done a lot before, you might find this
NOTE CONF
quite slow moving and quite easy.
So that's kind of a nice, easy thing for you.
NOTE CONF
You can just kind of take your foot off the
accelerator a little bit, but do keep and do keep
NOTE CONF
in touch with the course and make sure you're paying
attention.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the learning objectives are about implementing object oriented programming.
NOTE CONF
But they're also demonstrating an awareness of good practice, being
able to communicate about code and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, here we are.
This is the course page.
NOTE CONF
You can read all of this.
The second page is the getting started materials.
NOTE CONF
So if you have not set up either your own
machine or a dice machine you want to work on
NOTE CONF
to have all the tools you need.
Go to this page.
NOTE CONF
Start working through it.
So this is going to be your first task.
NOTE CONF
You really should try to get this done this week.
Ideally, or at least by next week.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully the materials are quite self-explanatory.
So for those of you who've already done it, did
NOTE CONF
you find it okay?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Some people have struggled with this, and if you're getting
NOTE CONF
stuck with it, please don't just sit around being stuck
with it.
NOTE CONF
Go along to a lab session.
We have lab sessions every day except Thursdays.
NOTE CONF
We've got two on Wednesdays, so just go along and
the demonstrators will be able to help you do this.
NOTE CONF
Or put questions on Piazza.
Don't just get stuck with it.
NOTE CONF
So that's the first thing you need to do.
So this has got everything on it.
NOTE CONF
So the materials the easiest place to go for that
is the schedule.
NOTE CONF
If you click on the schedule then you get all
the different weeks down here.
NOTE CONF
So this will tell you what's going on in lectures,
what's happening with tutorials, what labs you're supposed to be
NOTE CONF
doing and what's going on with assessment.
Um, so we're already starting on assessment, but so far
NOTE CONF
the assessment is fairly easy.
The bigger assessments are not going to kick in until
NOTE CONF
week five.
I think assessment one is, uh, released in week.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
No.
Week three.
NOTE CONF
Release.
Assessment one.
NOTE CONF
But at the moment we've got the quizzes starting.
So we do quizzes every week.
NOTE CONF
There's ten quizzes across the whole semester.
One of these is the Getting Starter quiz.
NOTE CONF
And this is super easy if you've done the installation,
because all you need to do is check to say
NOTE CONF
that you've done the installation and you already get 2%
of the course.
NOTE CONF
So that's a really good place to start getting some
marks.
NOTE CONF
And then every week we have a quiz which is
really lightweight.
NOTE CONF
It shouldn't take you very long.
It's really just checking that you've accessed the lecture materials.
NOTE CONF
You have a kind of idea of where we are,
you know, the basic core things that we're trying to
NOTE CONF
convey in the lectures.
And then so all of these weekly quizzes together are
NOTE CONF
worth 20%.
If you get over 80%, you get 2%.
NOTE CONF
If you get between 50 and 79, you get 1%.
That sounds really demanding, but these should not be difficult
NOTE CONF
questions.
It's just a matter of checking with the slides and
NOTE CONF
then the assessment.
That's where we're we're checking your skills and helping you
NOTE CONF
learn in a bit more detail.
So you'll find all of this on the on the
NOTE CONF
open course under the schedule.
If you click on the individual week, then you can
NOTE CONF
see this is where you can get the slides from.
Um, and then there's tabs for assessment.
NOTE CONF
In the tutorials you can get all the tutorial material.
We put solutions up here as you go through.
NOTE CONF
So in retrospect you can look at the solutions.
But we don't release those until the tutorial itself.
NOTE CONF
Um so that's where you find those things.
And then on learn.
NOTE CONF
Um, so how many people put your hands up if
you've joined Piazza already?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Quite a lot of you.
NOTE CONF
That's great.
I really would like all of you to be on
NOTE CONF
Piazza.
Piazza is such a useful source of information.
NOTE CONF
So, by the way, can you put your hands up
if you've got if you're next to an empty space
NOTE CONF
again?
Okay, so there's a few more spaces.
NOTE CONF
If you guys want to sit down, you can find
there are seats in here.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I've ever taught in quite such a
full lecture room.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we should have had the Spill-over room, but that
is also really annoying.
NOTE CONF
Um, so to join Piazza, you must go through and
click on Piazza.
NOTE CONF
That will take you to Piazza.
After that, there's a link on Open Course.
NOTE CONF
You can go through that as well, but you can
only sign up initially through through the learn web page.
NOTE CONF
So please join Piazza if you have any questions you
can ask them.
NOTE CONF
But you can also see the questions other people are
asking and how they're helping each other solve those problems.
NOTE CONF
And that's a really, really useful part of learning.
So we have Tas who are on Piazza a lot,
NOTE CONF
but they usually hang back and don't answer questions immediately
because it's actually really useful for you guys to answer
NOTE CONF
each other's questions.
And people get a lot of learning that done that
NOTE CONF
way.
So we'll have we have Tas on every day or
NOTE CONF
every other day.
So questions won't be left hanging.
NOTE CONF
But do jump in and and answer other people's questions.
So this year we are allowing anonymous um submissions.
NOTE CONF
Usually we just we allow it so you can be
anonymous to other students but not to staff.
NOTE CONF
But I know that some people feel really that makes
people hesitant about putting questions on.
NOTE CONF
So we've decided to I've decided that I want to
allow you to do it anonymously if you want to.
NOTE CONF
That means no bad behaviour.
We have very occasionally in the past had people put
NOTE CONF
really inappropriate things on Piazza and that sort of thing.
And that's why people are anxious about it being completely
NOTE CONF
anonymous.
But I don't think that's going to happen.
NOTE CONF
I think you can all be relied on to behave
in a responsible way.
NOTE CONF
So please behave responsibly.
And this is the assessment tab.
NOTE CONF
So when you're doing any assessment this is where you
have to go.
NOTE CONF
And you can see already the weekly quizzes are up
there.
NOTE CONF
Oh sorry.
This is and this is not what it looks like
NOTE CONF
for you.
I should have put in student preview.
NOTE CONF
So for you there's just just loads less junk.
So if you go to assessment you'll be able to
NOTE CONF
see the weekly quizzes.
You can click on that.
NOTE CONF
You can start doing the Getting Started quiz.
I know a lot of you have already done that,
NOTE CONF
and the week one quiz is going to be available
after this lecture, possibly not immediately after this lecture, because
NOTE CONF
we're just kind of getting up to speed.
But but soon.
NOTE CONF
Um, all right.
So let me go to the introductory slides.
NOTE CONF
I've got sort of two different lectures we're doing today.
Probably should have just started straight off with this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
so this is who we are.
NOTE CONF
I've already talked for about ten minutes before even introducing
myself.
NOTE CONF
So I'm Fiona.
I'm the course organiser and I'm also a lecturer.
NOTE CONF
I will do most of the lectures.
I've been teaching this course for.
NOTE CONF
This is my fifth year.
Now I really like this course.
NOTE CONF
I really like working with first year students.
One of my main research interests is transition from school
NOTE CONF
to university, which is actually kind of a hard transition.
It's such a different environment from school to uni.
NOTE CONF
So we do what we can to kind of scaffold
that change a bit, but I think it's still really
NOTE CONF
quite tough.
And you probably a lot of you will have found
NOTE CONF
that last semester and maybe continuing to find that it
is really demanding you're treated in such a different way
NOTE CONF
at university.
So my research historically, my research was in AI and
NOTE CONF
data integration, but I do more and more in computing
education.
NOTE CONF
So I'm really interested these days and how people learn
computing, how we can make inclusive environments in computing and
NOTE CONF
make it a bit more accessible.
So the other two lectures we have on Inf1 are
NOTE CONF
James and Adriana, and they are both doing the assessment.
So they're going to be setting the assignments that you
NOTE CONF
do, and they will.
You may not meet them face to face, but you
NOTE CONF
will certainly be hearing from them later on as we
come to that.
NOTE CONF
And then we have two course Tas.
Uh, Crystal.
NOTE CONF
So those of you who are not Scottish may that
may be a bit counterintuitive how you pronounce the surname,
NOTE CONF
but the z is not pronounced.
It's DL and colt and butter.
NOTE CONF
So they're both fantastic.
Colt.
NOTE CONF
And you'll see on Piazza a lot, uh, Chris is
doing more of the assessment stuff.
NOTE CONF
So they're always around to, to help you out.
So that's the team.
NOTE CONF
All right.
This is my dog.
NOTE CONF
Um, I always say I really like pets.
I know students really love pets as well.
NOTE CONF
When I sometimes teach remotely and the dog ever comes
in, everybody gets really excited about my dog.
NOTE CONF
So I put up a picture of my dog.
But what I'd really love to have is pictures of
NOTE CONF
other people's pets.
So I usually do a pet of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So if anybody has got a pet at home that
you're kind of missing, um, and would like to show
NOTE CONF
everyone, whether it's a dog or a gerbil or a
goldfish or whatever, or it doesn't even have to be
NOTE CONF
your own pet, just any animal you're fond of.
Just email me.
NOTE CONF
And every.
Every lecture.
NOTE CONF
I put up at least one pet.
But if you email it, it's not a competition.
NOTE CONF
I'm not choosing the cutest pet.
If you email me a picture of your pet, I
NOTE CONF
will put it up at least at some stage through
the course.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
So I always like to see at the beginning of
NOTE CONF
the lecture because I love to see other people's pets.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
So I've already covered a lot of this.
So this is a this is a really mixed group
NOTE CONF
of students, not in terms of ability.
Everybody here is very, very talented.
NOTE CONF
It's really hard to get a place in informatics.
Whatever your background, whatever you're from, if you've got a
NOTE CONF
place in informatics, it's because you have really good potential,
but you have very wide range of abilities of of
NOTE CONF
experience, and that can make it feel if you're someone
who hasn't done a lot, it can make you feel
NOTE CONF
that you're not very good at this, and you're not
going to learn this because you're mixing with people who've
NOTE CONF
been doing this for years.
And that's that's a false impression.
NOTE CONF
But it's really easy to feel like that.
So just try and always remind yourself that it's because
NOTE CONF
of the mixed experience.
It's not because of mixed ability.
NOTE CONF
And this this evens out over time during a degree.
agree.
NOTE CONF
So why are we doing object oriented programming?
It's a really common programming paradigm.
NOTE CONF
A lot of languages are object oriented and Java is
a really popular language.
NOTE CONF
It's well supported.
Um, it's well, we'll see.
NOTE CONF
We'll see as we go along.
Whether you like Java or not, there's always a lot
NOTE CONF
of questions about what we should be teaching in first
year.
NOTE CONF
And we're actually really we're rethinking first year now and
we might change the language.
NOTE CONF
I always used to think we should move away from
Java, but now I feel more and more.
NOTE CONF
I think actually Java is quite a good learning language.
So okay, so this I'm just going to put I
NOTE CONF
don't want you to look at this in much detail,
but I've already been talking a bit about what it's
NOTE CONF
like for people who haven't programmed.
So what is this?
NOTE CONF
This is a graph of the sort of concepts you
will learn in an introductory programming course.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is complex.
NOTE CONF
There's tons of stuff on it.
If you know, if you already know programming and you
NOTE CONF
look at this, you'd be like, yeah, I mean, these
are kind of I know all these all these concepts
NOTE CONF
are really obvious.
It's really this is really clear because you already have
NOTE CONF
this conceptualised in your brain.
That is why it shouldn't be too challenging for you
NOTE CONF
to to do this course if you've not done programming
or not done a lot of programming or not done
NOTE CONF
in this paradigm of programming, you're kind of constructing this
as you go along, so you shouldn't worry about it.
NOTE CONF
This will come with practice.
It's about learning.
NOTE CONF
The concepts of this kind of just falls into place
naturally.
NOTE CONF
Don't anybody, please don't ever try and memorise this, but
just be aware that conceptually, there's a lot of stuff
NOTE CONF
going on when you're programming.
And that's why introductory programming can be quite challenging to
NOTE CONF
begin with.
You're getting all these things in place.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is about this is a practical course.
NOTE CONF
This is about learning how to do good code.
Understanding and knowing stuff is only useful to the extent
NOTE CONF
that you can put it into practice.
Yeah, you definitely need to understand the concepts you need
NOTE CONF
to be.
You need to know stuff, but if you can't put
NOTE CONF
that into practice, it's not really very helpful and you're
not going to get a great mark in the course.
NOTE CONF
So practice is absolutely the core of this.
That means your tutorial exercises.
NOTE CONF
It means your lab exercises.
That is where you get the practice in.
NOTE CONF
So keep practising.
That is what makes you a good programmer.
NOTE CONF
That's how you learn.
like these complicated concepts.
NOTE CONF
They just come naturally as you practice them.
So we want good.
NOTE CONF
What is the difference in good code and function in
code?
NOTE CONF
We'll talk about this quite a lot.
So this is all about how easy it is to
NOTE CONF
reuse, how easy it is for other people to have
a look at it and understand what you're doing.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of bad code out there.
Somebody hacked something together and it works great.
NOTE CONF
But if it can't be reused, if you can't go
back to it in a few months and extend it
NOTE CONF
or whatever, which, by the way, you'll feel when you're
writing code, it's so familiar and you think you know
NOTE CONF
it really well.
If you if you go away from it, even for
NOTE CONF
a couple of weeks, you come back to it and
you're like, oh God, what was I doing here?
NOTE CONF
If you've written it well, you will know.
If you've written it badly.
NOTE CONF
It'll just be really difficult.
So it's all about how you write good code.
NOTE CONF
And if you want a career that involves coding at
all, being able to write good code is very important.
NOTE CONF
Don't make more bad code.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
We're not.
It's not about hacking.
NOTE CONF
It's about design.
Uh, okay, so you probably know all of this.
NOTE CONF
We have the two lectures a week.
They're all in here.
NOTE CONF
One tutorial a week.
They haven't done the allocations yet, I don't think.
NOTE CONF
This will be based largely in academic families like influencers.
So hopefully the groups will be fairly similar that we
NOTE CONF
have different sizes, so it won't be quite the same.
But you should be with a lot of familiar people.
NOTE CONF
Um, the approach is very different to anyone.
A you don't need to prepare for tutorials, you do
NOTE CONF
it in the tutorial.
Tutorials are not assessed, they are compulsory.
NOTE CONF
We do take attendance.
If you're not attending, it'll be followed up.
NOTE CONF
If you're on certain kinds of visas, that's a real
problem for you.
NOTE CONF
If you're not, you know it's less of a problem,
but it is a real problem for the course because
NOTE CONF
this is absolutely fundamental to tutorials.
So please go to the tutorials.
NOTE CONF
Um, a lot of them are about working with other
people.
NOTE CONF
We have pair programming that sort of stuff, discussing things
in groups.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that kind of interaction is a really important
part of exactly everything I've been talking about, the kind
NOTE CONF
of software engineering side of things.
We also have lab exercises.
NOTE CONF
These are also not assessed, and that means that people
tend not to do them.
NOTE CONF
But this is where you get your practice in.
If you want to practice.
NOTE CONF
If you want to improve your skills.
Do the lab exercises.
NOTE CONF
We have the drop in labs five times a week.
Um, they don't exactly correspond.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to be going there to do your
lab exercises.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to only ask about lab exercises during
the lab sessions.
NOTE CONF
You can ask about any aspect of the course, but
the demonstrators in the labs will be particularly prepared to
NOTE CONF
help with the lab exercises.
If you've got questions about tutorials.
NOTE CONF
Ask a tutor.
But if you've got general questions about the course, well,
NOTE CONF
I'll probably put them on Piazza.
But you can also ask the demonstrators.
NOTE CONF
So the labs are in 606, um, which is an
open lab.
NOTE CONF
I've had complaints in the past from students that they
went along and there were no demonstrators there.
NOTE CONF
That I don't think has ever actually been true, but
sometimes it's really hard to see who the demonstrators are.
NOTE CONF
So you might think there's no demonstrators.
So I've told them that they need to wear badges.
NOTE CONF
So I've got to actually on my way back, I've
got to go and pick up some stickers so that
NOTE CONF
they can write their name on and then say that
there are demonstrators.
NOTE CONF
So they should be really easy to see.
Um, if you're having problems, please let me know and
NOTE CONF
I will harass them about doing that.
And then you have your weekly quizzes.
NOTE CONF
You can earn badges, you earn a mastery badge if
you get 80% sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, 80% or over, which is your 2% of grades
or making Progress badge if you get over 50.
NOTE CONF
Some people love badges.
I'm I'm such a sucker for gamification.
NOTE CONF
I always love to like, collect things.
Some people don't care, but you also get your point.
NOTE CONF
So that's why we're doing that.
So also I put survey questions onto the weekly quizzes
NOTE CONF
just to touch in to see how people are feeling
about things, to see how everything's going.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, those survey questions are not assessed.
I mean, they're not associated with marks, but it's really,
NOTE CONF
really helpful way for me to kind of keep in
touch.
NOTE CONF
One of the things I do really like large class
teaching, but it means it's really difficult to, you know,
NOTE CONF
I don't get to know you personally.
Really.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's a really good way for me to
get a feel for how the class is feeling.
NOTE CONF
Obviously the class reps are really useful for that as
well.
NOTE CONF
If you come up, please, if you have any thoughts
or anything to say, please come up and talk to
NOTE CONF
me afterwards.
Please come to my office hour.
NOTE CONF
But in general, it's hard to get to know everyone,
so that's really useful.
NOTE CONF
But, but so I do my office out in 606
because that's where you guys are mostly hanging out.
NOTE CONF
And I always bring biscuits.
So please come and talk to me sometimes.
NOTE CONF
I have lots of people coming to talk to me,
and sometimes when they do, do come along.
NOTE CONF
And also, just from a sort of incentivization point of
view, often people are wanting references for if you're applying
NOTE CONF
for an internship or whatever.
And that's really hard when people don't know you that
NOTE CONF
well, which is usually the case in first because you're
in big classes.
NOTE CONF
So the more you interact with staff, the easier it
is to to get those kind of personalised references that
NOTE CONF
really help.
And I'll be able to do that if I know
NOTE CONF
you, if you just like, well, I was in your
class.
NOTE CONF
Like, I can't really say anything beyond looking at your
grades.
NOTE CONF
So always look for those opportunities to build connections.
It's really useful.
NOTE CONF
And also Piazza is really useful for saying anything you
want to say about the course.
NOTE CONF
Okay, Cabe, we've had loads of complaints from people about
Cabe and I.
NOTE CONF
Totally.
I'm totally with you on this.
NOTE CONF
I kind of really annoys me that I have to
come out to Cabe to teach.
NOTE CONF
I know that it's drawbacks.
So we've had complaints that there's nowhere to sit.
NOTE CONF
There's not enough seating in here.
You guys are sitting on the floor if you've got
NOTE CONF
in between lectures and it's not great.
Um, so we are the college really wants us to
NOTE CONF
teach out here so that all the science engineering students,
students are together.
NOTE CONF
We're I hope that we'll be able to move back
to Central Area next year.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if that's possible, but we're kind of
hoping working on it.
NOTE CONF
That's not going to help you this year, though.
So in the meantime, I've decided that lectures are going
NOTE CONF
to be live streamed.
Normally, I don't do this because I really think there's
NOTE CONF
a lot of value in actually coming along.
You'll see it's to some extent interactive.
NOTE CONF
I think being here is really useful, but at the
same time, I don't want to put the burden on
NOTE CONF
people if you're spending hours commuting or whatever.
All the lectures are recorded anyway, but usually they're only
NOTE CONF
available later on, whereas now they are being live streamed
so that you don't have to come to QUB if
NOTE CONF
you don't want to.
But do still try and make the effort if you
NOTE CONF
can, but also if you're hanging out, there's nowhere to
sit.
NOTE CONF
Maybe try Jnb maybe try merkerson house.
I don't know if any of you have tried those.
NOTE CONF
So we are we're there in the nucleus where the
star is.
NOTE CONF
So, Jacob, see, the little diagonal bit is, um, the
main entrance.
NOTE CONF
If you go straight across, you get to Jacob.
There's a cafe there, and there's quite a lot of
NOTE CONF
seating or merkerson houses just where the buses come in
on West Main roads.
NOTE CONF
And there's also a cafe and quite a bit of
seating and some little side rooms you can go into
NOTE CONF
up there as well.
So if you're looking for somewhere to hang out, try
NOTE CONF
that.
Okay, officer, we have a poll going on.
NOTE CONF
How have people voted in the poll?
Let me see.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's quite tied.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I will select from these whichever is I think
it's just Monday afternoon is the best one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I will email to confirm that um and let
NOTE CONF
you know.
Oh and now I'll do the biscuit vote.
NOTE CONF
What biscuit should I bring.
So I bring along biscuits for anyone who comes.
NOTE CONF
But I also leave them in the kitchen there.
So if you have a favourite biscuit just go ahead
NOTE CONF
and vote.
Okay, so I think I've really gone through all of
NOTE CONF
this.
Lectures are really important.
NOTE CONF
I try and do a lot of live coding.
Live coding is really hard.
NOTE CONF
So even when I'm doing super basic things, I'm constantly
making mistakes.
NOTE CONF
But this is a really good opportunity for you to
help debugging.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Settle down.
I assume you're all talking about biscuits, but think about
NOTE CONF
that later.
You can vote every week on biscuits.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to get your favourite biscuit in this
week.
NOTE CONF
Don't worry.
Um, so these are the lab sessions.
NOTE CONF
You should have these all in your timetable.
These are drop in.
NOTE CONF
Just go to anyone.
Go as often as you like.
NOTE CONF
Um, they're often not that well attended, which seems a
real waste to me because it's a really good opportunity
NOTE CONF
to work through stuff you're doing.
If you're not 100% sure of anything, just work through
NOTE CONF
it with one of the demonstrators.
They're paid to help you so you can get 1
NOTE CONF
to 1 tutoring quite often, because if it's not that
full, they can just be there to help you.
NOTE CONF
So do go along.
Okay, so let me show you which one, what the
NOTE CONF
lab exercises are like.
Oh Ooh, raisin.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
So you can get.
NOTE CONF
So you get to the lab exercises from this lab
site on Open Course.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what's going on there, but if you
follow this link, it will take you to the right
NOTE CONF
place.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can see every week you have a mix
of let's say week three overview.
NOTE CONF
So there's a mix between warm up core and optional.
So.
NOTE CONF
So in week three for example there's three warm up
three core and one optional.
NOTE CONF
So I would strongly recommend that every week you do
the warm up, which is stuff that should be familiar
NOTE CONF
to you from past weeks.
The core which is really what we're learning at the
NOTE CONF
moment.
Try and do those.
NOTE CONF
If you have time to do the optional great, that's
less of a priority.
NOTE CONF
But these warm up and core exercises should really be
things you prioritise about this course.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of different aspects to this course and
people sometimes wonder what to prioritise.
NOTE CONF
I would absolutely prioritise warm up and core lab exercises.
We also have down here advanced exercises.
NOTE CONF
These are not part of the course.
These are not really so connected with lectures.
NOTE CONF
These are beyond what we're doing in class.
These are just they're if you've done tons of Java,
NOTE CONF
you want to do something interesting.
Here's something for you to try.
NOTE CONF
If you're not like super experienced with Java, just ignore
all of that.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Tutorials, cooperative learning, lots of debugging and testing and stuff.
I think we've done all of this and you'll be
NOTE CONF
assigned so they come later in the week.
That is because.
NOTE CONF
So we have uh, I think six.
They're not every week.
NOTE CONF
So they start in week three and they finish in
week ten.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think there's six tutorials that are kind of
core material.
NOTE CONF
We also have tutorials that focus on assessment.
So there'll be preparation for assessments that are coming up.
NOTE CONF
But also the second assignment is in two parts.
You do the first bit and then you get feedback.
NOTE CONF
You go it's marked for you although there's no grades
associated with it.
NOTE CONF
And then in a tutorial we'll go through that and
then you improve it for resubmission.
NOTE CONF
So I'll talk about that in here at the time.
So we've got three pieces of coursework starting in week
NOTE CONF
320%, 20% and 40%.
So although it's 100% coursework, the final piece of assessment
NOTE CONF
is during the exam period.
And that is because we used to do it all
NOTE CONF
in a semester.
And it was just so intense.
NOTE CONF
It was really ridiculous.
We've dropped a little bit of the assessment.
NOTE CONF
So the assignment three is now shorter.
And that is because it was just too intense.
NOTE CONF
We got a lot of feedback from students that there
was just too much assessment during the course.
NOTE CONF
I think it's really important that it's not too overwhelming.
So we've dropped that a little bit.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully you'll find it a bit more manageable.
And then we have the continuous assessment and the weekly
NOTE CONF
quizzes, which is worth up to 20%.
And the weekly quizzes are released on the Monday after
NOTE CONF
the first lecture of the week.
So in week one, we released the week one quiz
NOTE CONF
today, and then you have the whole of that week
and the next week to do it.
NOTE CONF
So a week one quiz is due lunchtime on Friday
in week two.
NOTE CONF
So for example, the week six quiz is released Monday
week six and it's due Friday week seven.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I would definitely recommend doing it the week
that it's for.
NOTE CONF
After the lecture you'll remember it easier more easily.
But if for some reason you don't have time or
NOTE CONF
you're away, or you're not feeling well or whatever, you
have that week's grace.
NOTE CONF
They really should not be difficult or time consuming or
stressful.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so how do you do well in this course?
So you will see on the open course page, I
NOTE CONF
have given some suggestions about how much how you should
allow allocate your time.
NOTE CONF
Um, you don't have to stick to this, but I
think you hopefully will find it quite helpful.
NOTE CONF
Um, what did I say?
Tending lectures.
NOTE CONF
Really important.
Whether that's in person or online, in person, preferably attending
NOTE CONF
tutorial, working on your lab exercises, reading set texts.
I put 1.5 hours.
NOTE CONF
Actually, I might change that.
That seems way too much for reading set text because
NOTE CONF
as I said, reading is you need to know stuff,
and sometimes it's useful to read different explanations of what
NOTE CONF
you've got in lectures.
But practice is a really important stuff.
NOTE CONF
So have a look at those hours if you're doing
something completely different to those hours, maybe think about whether
NOTE CONF
you've got the balance right.
So do not work really long hours.
NOTE CONF
Like some lecturers are really encouraging to work very long
hours.
NOTE CONF
I don't think that's a good idea.
Right.
NOTE CONF
This is your first year at uni.
You should be having a good time.
NOTE CONF
There's lots of other things to do.
You should be joining clubs and societies if you're into
NOTE CONF
that sort of thing, or doing whatever it is that
you're interested in, you also should be having plenty of
NOTE CONF
rest.
It's really important that you get that balance right.
NOTE CONF
It can be really tempting just to well, for some
of you, I never really have this problem.
NOTE CONF
I'm good at work life balance because I really like
having time off.
NOTE CONF
But some people, you know, do get really into it.
I just really want to do a bit better.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to work more hours.
Overall.
NOTE CONF
That's really unhelpful.
This is a you know, you're here for four years.
NOTE CONF
If you work really intensely, you're going to burn yourself
out and you're not going to enjoy it.
NOTE CONF
So don't do that.
And it's okay.
NOTE CONF
You know, you don't have to do perfectly in everything.
You don't have to get a perfect grade in the
NOTE CONF
course.
It doesn't matter if things slip a little bit.
NOTE CONF
I mean, yes, keep keep focussed on the work you
have to do, but just don't give yourself a hard
NOTE CONF
time.
Sometimes you're going to get behind.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you've been ill or something's happened to you about
to go away.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe you've just been, like, not focusing or doing
other things.
NOTE CONF
That's okay.
Don't stress.
NOTE CONF
It's really important if you get behind.
Take steps to get up to speed.
NOTE CONF
Go along to the lab sessions.
Talk to me.
NOTE CONF
Come along to my office hours.
Think about.
NOTE CONF
So what often happens is that people get behind and
then they're, like, embarrassed about it.
NOTE CONF
And they feel like I can't go because I haven't
even done anything since week one, and they'll think I'm
NOTE CONF
an idiot and whatever.
We're here to help you.
NOTE CONF
So if you get behind, just get the support you
need.
NOTE CONF
The support you need is there.
Just make sure you access it.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if you're worried about it, just practice.
Get that practice in.
NOTE CONF
And this is about laying the foundations for the future.
It's not about getting 100%.
NOTE CONF
Now, those of you who've been in Scottish school system
and the English school system and probably a lot of
NOTE CONF
other school systems, you're so trained to the grade my
daughter is doing.
NOTE CONF
She's an S6 now.
That's her final year.
NOTE CONF
And it's kind of amazing to me how absolutely focus
everything she does on is on getting that extra point.
NOTE CONF
Phrasing things exactly right.
So the examining board is going to give the mark.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's not what we're doing here.
NOTE CONF
We're doing this is about learning.
Nobody's ever going to really care about your first year
NOTE CONF
grade.
If you if you want to do a year abroad,
NOTE CONF
maybe it's a little bit more pressure.
But generally the grading first is not that important.
NOTE CONF
It's not part of your overall degree.
It's about getting the learning in right.
NOTE CONF
So don't obsess about getting every mark.
Think about are you getting underlining principles?
NOTE CONF
And by the way, um, oh, actually I'm going to
talk about AI in the next lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, I haven't got anything that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so.
So the more you get other people, including automated things,
NOTE CONF
to do the work for you, the easier it is
to get good grades, but the less you're laying the
NOTE CONF
foundations for the future.
So you're going to get into second year.
NOTE CONF
You're developing really important skills here.
And if you shortcut that, you're going to really struggle
NOTE CONF
later on.
So think of this as about laying the foundations for
NOTE CONF
your future learning.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So how do you know if you're doing well, if
you're getting really good grades and everything and you're not
NOTE CONF
cheating or you're not getting too much assistance where that's
not right, then that's great.
NOTE CONF
You're doing well.
But if you're starting from without any experience, you're not.
NOTE CONF
You're very unlikely to be getting amongst the highest grades.
That doesn't mean it's not going well if you're laying
NOTE CONF
the foundations, if you're learning more, if you're getting, say,
a poorer grade, but understanding afterwards why that happened and
NOTE CONF
how you can improve.
This is all good.
NOTE CONF
This is what this course is for.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
Bla bla bla.
So just remember again the marking criteria may be a
NOTE CONF
little bit used to this after semester one, but it's
really different to what most of you will be used
NOTE CONF
to in schools where if you're a very strong student,
you're probably expecting to get 80s and 90s.
NOTE CONF
Everything you need is not really set up like that.
It's set up so that anything over 70 is considered
NOTE CONF
excellent.
And if you're coming at this without any program experience
NOTE CONF
and you're getting in the 60s, that's a really, really
good effort.
NOTE CONF
So you have to adjust your, um, expectations a little
bit.
NOTE CONF
Having said that, we do get a lot of very
high grades in that course.
NOTE CONF
And that's because a lot of this is very familiar
to the people who've done it already.
NOTE CONF
Uh, uncommon grade.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So Inf1 is a core course.
You cannot proceed to second year unless you pass in
NOTE CONF
from B.
That means you have to get 40% overall to pass.
NOTE CONF
If you don't do that in during the semester with
the with the assessments, there is a reset in the
NOTE CONF
summer, which is probably going to be a take home
exam.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you must pass this to go into sorry
if you're an informatics student, by the way.
NOTE CONF
If you're not, if you're in a different school, it's
a little bit different.
NOTE CONF
But for an informatics student you have to pass it
to progress.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we'll talk about that.
And this is okay.
NOTE CONF
So if you need help these are all the people
go to Piazza.
NOTE CONF
All these things you can see these on the slides.
I've already talked about this, but also there's a lot
NOTE CONF
of really helpful stuff.
Comp SoC and hoppers, if you're engaged in those communities
NOTE CONF
that can be really helpful in pals is really helpful.
Has anybody.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Hands up here if you've ever engaged with him for
NOTE CONF
pals.
Oh, okay.
NOTE CONF
Hardly anybody.
That's a real shame because they're doing really useful stuff.
NOTE CONF
I'll get in and talk about what they're doing.
This is really useful stuff.
NOTE CONF
I would really recommend doing this.
Okay, so I think that is everything I want to
NOTE CONF
say about the logistics.
Let me see.
NOTE CONF
Where are we with biscuits.
Out.
NOTE CONF
What is even.
What does that even mean.
NOTE CONF
And that's just like that seems really generic.
That's not a specific kind of biscuit.
NOTE CONF
I can get some biscuits without it.
I'm quite tempted to just go for Jammie Dodgers.
NOTE CONF
Everyone loves the Jammy Dodger.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what are we doing?
We've got about just under 20 minutes.
NOTE CONF
So now we're going to actually start the course.
Um, we may not get through the whole lecture.
NOTE CONF
That's quite normal in the first lecture, but because I
think it is really important to give the groundwork, I
NOTE CONF
really want everyone to be on the same page with
what this course is about and how you have to
NOTE CONF
fit everything together.
If anything I've said is unclear.
NOTE CONF
There'll be a Q&A at the end.
Whew.
NOTE CONF
Which we have to use these days is really annoying
for Q&A.
NOTE CONF
It's not as good as the mental metre, which I
used to use, but there is an opportunity for that.
NOTE CONF
Come and talk to me afterwards.
Put questions on Piazza.
NOTE CONF
All right, so let's get started.
So put your hands up.
NOTE CONF
How many people have programmed in Java before?
Okay, so maybe a third.
NOTE CONF
How many people have done any sort of object oriented
programming, including Python and stuff?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's maybe more like could be two thirds,
but there's still a lot of people who haven't.
NOTE CONF
Fine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are like, oh, that's weird.
Why is it displaying like that?
NOTE CONF
Oh, that's because I'm in tech shop.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
I want to do it from tech shop.
It's.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Settle down.
NOTE CONF
Time to start listening.
Oh, maybe.
NOTE CONF
But what?
What's going on?
NOTE CONF
Why is that blank?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Why is it going back when I put it in
NOTE CONF
full screen mode?
What's that about?
NOTE CONF
All right.
No worries.
NOTE CONF
We'll do it.
Not in full screen mode.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
I have no idea what's going on there.
NOTE CONF
That's very weird.
Okay, let's just maximise it and do it like this.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So in from B is a course that we've taught
NOTE CONF
for many years.
It's been we've been refined and tweaked and, and altered
NOTE CONF
over the years to incorporate best practice and different approaches.
But basically teaching Java as a fundamental language as an
NOTE CONF
entry language is is a is a thing people have
been doing for a long time, and it's still a
NOTE CONF
thing.
A lot of people are doing I've actually been recently.
NOTE CONF
I've been in the States last semester and I visited
a lot of universities, talked about first year teaching, and
NOTE CONF
Java is pretty common.
A lot of people use Python, use Python, a lot
NOTE CONF
of people use Java.
These are probably the two most common languages.
NOTE CONF
I also found somewhere else that used Haskell, which I
was quite surprised about.
NOTE CONF
But there is, I think it was.
Was it Stanford or Berkeley?
NOTE CONF
Somebody else is using Haskell.
Anyway, Java is a is a good starting language.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what is going on with Acrobat.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let me just kill Acrobat and try and open it
again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Go away.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So Java is an imperative language.
NOTE CONF
That means imperative is about you give something.
A list of things to do, and it goes through
NOTE CONF
the list and it does it.
So a lot of things we do in everyday life
NOTE CONF
are imperative.
For example, cooking, cooking recipes are usually imperative.
NOTE CONF
They'll have a list of things to do and you
go through in the right order.
NOTE CONF
If you try and do things out of order, well,
sometimes it's fine actually, but generally it's set up so
NOTE CONF
that you do things in the right order and that
can be quite important.
NOTE CONF
So see processing step by step.
Now in object oriented programming it's all based around objects.
NOTE CONF
And objects live in classes.
So we're thinking when the the mindset of object oriented
NOTE CONF
programming is thinking about what sort of things exist in
the world, right.
NOTE CONF
So that might be we might be talking about different
kinds of students.
NOTE CONF
We might be talking about physical things.
These are objects.
NOTE CONF
And object oriented programming is all about how objects interact
with one another.
NOTE CONF
And objects are organised into classes and objects.
Do what we carry states.
NOTE CONF
That means they remember things about themselves.
So they Day.
NOTE CONF
So?
So they they know where you've got to.
NOTE CONF
If you're going through a recipe there will know.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Actually this is not a very clear explanation.
So an object knows.
NOTE CONF
For example, if an object is a car, it will
know its own speed.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe it'll know whether its you know its own
colour.
NOTE CONF
It will know the state that it's in.
So objects are able to carry state.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So the idea is that the program is structured like
NOTE CONF
the real world into objects, which are organised into classes
of things that are the same kind of things.
NOTE CONF
So they store data about themselves.
Um, they can they have behaviour, which means they can
NOTE CONF
do things in response to messages.
So you can send the message to an object and
NOTE CONF
it'll carry out certain behaviour.
They also have identity.
NOTE CONF
That means that you can have two objects that have
exactly the same state, but they are different objects and
NOTE CONF
they can be treated differently.
Now, all of this might seem a little unclear if
NOTE CONF
you don't.
If you've never done this before.
NOTE CONF
But don't worry, this will.
We'll be going over this.
NOTE CONF
We'll be seeing lots of examples of this.
This will become much more familiar.
NOTE CONF
So state behaviour and identity.
These are the three things about objects.
NOTE CONF
But they don't have to.
They might not have any state.
NOTE CONF
They might not have any behaviour that might be empty.
There might be nothing they can actually do.
NOTE CONF
But these are all things you can associate with objects.
And objects are always oriented in classes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's start off.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to start off by okay.
So let me just talk about okay.
NOTE CONF
So right creating a new class.
So in Java code sits inside a class.
NOTE CONF
So you'll be doing a lot of creating classes.
Classes have names.
NOTE CONF
It's a convention that they use CamelCase.
So they start with a capital letter.
NOTE CONF
And every new word has a capital letter.
It's not it's not going to force you to do
NOTE CONF
it.
But you always should do it like that.
NOTE CONF
And it goes into its own file.
Usually as you get much more complex, you'll find that's
NOTE CONF
not always true.
But from the point of view of this class and
NOTE CONF
of course, and mostly what you're doing.
Each class has a file of its own and it
NOTE CONF
ends in Java.
So I'm going to start using Visual Studio Code instead
NOTE CONF
of um.
So mostly we're going to be using IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
If you've done the Getting Started materials then you will
be familiar with IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
Um let's do so I'm going to do a new
file.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to call it Hello world.
So you see I'm using CamelCase here with my capital
NOTE CONF
H and my capital W.
And I'm going to call it Java okay.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to put that in.
Um, let's just I'll just save it in here.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
I've got to start off.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to start off this is, this is
the class file.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to call it a class.
And the name of the class is hello world.
NOTE CONF
And it should be the same.
Generally the convention is that the name of the class
NOTE CONF
is going to be the same as the name of
the file you've stored it in, and I have my
NOTE CONF
curly braces now Also, when I declare a class, I
have to say how accessible it is.
NOTE CONF
So for now, I'm going to put public.
We'll look at what that means later on.
NOTE CONF
Now all classes have to have a main message main
method.
NOTE CONF
So you usually always start off defining a class by
defining the main method.
NOTE CONF
So you have to call it main.
And then main methods always take in an array of
NOTE CONF
strings.
That's called args.
NOTE CONF
So this is what's coming into the method.
And again there's certain things we have to declare about
NOTE CONF
a method.
And don't worry about the details.
NOTE CONF
We'll get on to this later.
But I'm going to say this is public.
NOTE CONF
Anyone can see it.
It's static.
NOTE CONF
We'll talk about what that means later.
And then I have to say what sort of thing
NOTE CONF
is this method going to return?
So what I want to do with Hello World is
NOTE CONF
I just want to print out a statement.
I don't want to return anything to the program.
NOTE CONF
I just want to print it out and stop.
So I don't want anything to be returned.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to put void in here.
And then I'm going to open my curly braces and
NOTE CONF
print.
And in Java printing is System.out.println.
NOTE CONF
Learn and it's.
I'm going to put a string.
NOTE CONF
So in Java you always put strings and double braces.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Not double braces.
Double quotation marks I'm going to say hello world okay.
NOTE CONF
And statements in Java always end in a semicolon.
So unless I've got a typo in that, which is
NOTE CONF
very common when I'm doing when you're doing live coding,
it's almost impossible not to get loads of typos.
NOTE CONF
So let me see.
It's a hello world.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you can see here I've got this hello
world Java.
NOTE CONF
So Java is a compiled language right?
So how many people put your hands up if you're
NOTE CONF
familiar with what it means to be a compiled language
okay.
NOTE CONF
So lots of people but a lot of people aren't.
So what this means is it takes something that's more
NOTE CONF
or less machine readable.
So you can see what I've written here.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, more or less human readable.
This is written in in stuff that's very accessible to
NOTE CONF
humans, and it turns it into something that's machine readable.
That's the first step.
NOTE CONF
It will first compile it.
And then once you have the compiled code, you can
NOTE CONF
run it.
So to compile it I need to say it's Java.
NOTE CONF
C is a command and I put hello world Java.
Okay, so what's it saying?
NOTE CONF
Can't find some stupid typo.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can anybody debug this for me?
What have I done?
NOTE CONF
I don't know what I've done.
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
It's not strings, it's string.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.
Is that going to help?
NOTE CONF
Okay, great.
So we do a lot of live debugging because it's
NOTE CONF
really it's just even typing your name when loads of
people are watching you is really difficult.
NOTE CONF
And however many times I practice I'm always like, okay,
so we've compiled it.
NOTE CONF
Now if we see what we've got, we've got this
hello world class.
NOTE CONF
And we've also got Hello World Java.
So I wrote the Hello World Java.
NOTE CONF
Hello world class has appeared when I compiled it.
So if we look at Hello World Java okay.
NOTE CONF
That's just what we, what we typed.
I don't know if you can even see this.
NOTE CONF
This is maybe too small, but if we look at
what's in.
NOTE CONF
Hello world class.
This is a binary file.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at that you can see that's
unintelligible to to a human that is machine readable.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
So now we can just run it.
NOTE CONF
We just use Java and then the name of the
class.
NOTE CONF
And now it's done the printing.
So it's actually run it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is maybe so you don't need to think
NOTE CONF
about this very much because we're using Ides.
But I think it's really important just to begin with
NOTE CONF
to, to show you what that means to be a
compiled language.
NOTE CONF
We'll talk later on about pros and cons of why
you might want to use a compiled language.
NOTE CONF
Um, but that is what it means.
It's this two step process.
NOTE CONF
However, mostly what we're going to do is use IntelliJ,
and IntelliJ does a lot of stuff for you.
NOTE CONF
And that means that although it's still a compiled language
and these two steps are still happening, you're not aware
NOTE CONF
of that.
You just press run and it'll do that for you
NOTE CONF
without you having to be involved in that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is IntelliJ.
I'm going to start a new project and I'm going
NOTE CONF
to do the Hello World project in here.
So again I'm going to create this file called Hello
NOTE CONF
World.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um now let me make this bigger.
So often it's kind of, um, quite I don't always
NOTE CONF
think as much as I should do about how visible
things are to you and stuff, so if it's not
NOTE CONF
visible, please just shout out.
Um, I have to.
NOTE CONF
How do I make this bigger?
Actually, I should know this.
NOTE CONF
It's not okay.
So I'm going to get the main screen and then
NOTE CONF
see if I can make that bigger.
So to make a new class, this is slightly unintuitive
NOTE CONF
actually, even though Java is largely very intuitive.
I mean, IntelliJ is largely very intuitive.
NOTE CONF
You have to go to source and then you right
click.
NOTE CONF
And you choose New Java class.
And I'm going to call this Hello World again.
NOTE CONF
And it automatically creates this class.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let me see.
Is that.
NOTE CONF
Why is it not getting bigger?
Can you see that?
NOTE CONF
Okay, I might practice.
I don't really know why.
NOTE CONF
Why?
It's not responding to the Apple Plus, but I will
NOTE CONF
practice making that bigger in case it's not clear.
Okay, so it's already filled this with it knows it's
NOTE CONF
a class.
It's making it public.
NOTE CONF
And now I need to add the main method.
So I just have to put mine in.
NOTE CONF
And as if by magic, all of that stuff I
talked about automatically appears.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to do the printing.
Hello world.
NOTE CONF
Already.
The semicolon is there.
NOTE CONF
So it already gives me all this stuff.
So to run it I just press the green arrow
NOTE CONF
and I can either run the whole class, the whole
the whole class, or I can run just the method.
NOTE CONF
In this case, it doesn't make any difference because there
only is one method, but later on you'll be doing
NOTE CONF
classes with more than one method.
So I'm going to run that okay.
NOTE CONF
And then what.
The output appears down here.
NOTE CONF
So you can see this is what it's actually doing.
And as you can see, the compilation and the running
NOTE CONF
happened at the same time.
You don't notice that happening.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So that is how you do that in IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
So let's go back to the slides.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've had a look at what this means.
And we've had so generally I do a lot of
NOTE CONF
things using live coding.
So I'm just going to flick through the slides.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to say everything I've just said as
I'm coding, but it's in the slides so that you
NOTE CONF
can if you want to go back and refer to
it in the slides, it's all there.
NOTE CONF
But if you just prefer to watch the video, you
don't have to see me going through everything twice.
NOTE CONF
So everything I should have already said here.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
So the edit compile run cycle, which again, if you're
using an IDE, it's really just an edit run cycle.
NOTE CONF
But the point is so you you create your program,
or you change your program and then you compile it
NOTE CONF
and then you run it.
But the kind of the point I'm trying to make
NOTE CONF
here is that this is a cycle.
And this should be happening really, really frequently.
NOTE CONF
Um, the golden rules of programming are save regularly, run
it often.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because if you make 1 or 2 changes and then
NOTE CONF
you run it and it breaks, it's not very difficult
to figure out what went wrong because there's only 1
NOTE CONF
or 2 things it could be.
If you've been coding for half an hour or an
NOTE CONF
hour and you run it and it doesn't run, it's
a nightmare because there's so many different things it could
NOTE CONF
be.
And that could put I mean, it's just it's just
NOTE CONF
a nightmare.
So the more often you run it, the more sure
NOTE CONF
you are of where things are going.
And we'll talk about these different kinds of correctness later
NOTE CONF
on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's have some basic functionality.
Let's do some.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to keep this in the hello world class,
which is not very good practice because the class should
NOTE CONF
always do something relating to its name.
And now I'm going to be doing some arithmetic, but
NOTE CONF
I'm just doing this for demonstration purposes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to print out, The sum of.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Give me an integer.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Another integer.
NOTE CONF
Two.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
So I'm printing out a string there.
You can tell it's a string because it's in double
NOTE CONF
quotation marks.
This means that Java is not going to evaluate that.
NOTE CONF
It's just prints as is.
Now I'm going to get Java to do a little
NOTE CONF
bit more work on the printing out.
So I'm going to put three plus two.
NOTE CONF
So slightly annoyingly IntelliJ always comes up with these these
pop up things which can be useful.
NOTE CONF
But sometimes they just get in the way.
So what's going to happen when I run this.
NOTE CONF
So it prints out the string.
And then with this this is not a string.
NOTE CONF
So it's looking at what's going on here.
It can tell that these are numbers.
NOTE CONF
It knows what plus means.
So it's doing the work here.
NOTE CONF
It's doing the evaluation and then it's printing it out.
And actually so I can get rid of the LN
NOTE CONF
means add a new line.
So usually we use println because you always want a
NOTE CONF
new line.
But here we don't want a new line.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's doing the sum.
Um, and let me just show you the quotient.
NOTE CONF
So three divided by two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What do people think?
The answer of this is going to be.
NOTE CONF
Any idea what this is going to be 3 to
3 divided by two.
NOTE CONF
Anyone know?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
One.
The answer is one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you're not familiar with what we're doing, that
NOTE CONF
might seem a little bit weird.
From a math point of view, the answer is obviously
NOTE CONF
1.5.
But if we run that, we're going to see the
NOTE CONF
answer is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So why is that happening?
Now this is to do with types.
NOTE CONF
Typing in Java is really important.
Three is an integer.
NOTE CONF
Two is an integer.
So when Java is interpreting what it actually should do
NOTE CONF
with this, the the class of the arguments of this
function are important.
NOTE CONF
So it's interpreting this as integer division.
So if you just put integers in this means it's
NOTE CONF
an integer operation.
It will only return integers.
NOTE CONF
So it works out it's 1.5.
It'll return that as an integer and it always rounds
NOTE CONF
down.
So the answer it returns is one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's have a look at different things we can do
NOTE CONF
with this.
So the name is bond.
NOTE CONF
And that's one string.
And then I'm going to put another string in.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's get rid of that.
NOTE CONF
We don't need that anymore.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this plus we've already seen this is doing integer
addition.
NOTE CONF
But now I'm passing in two strings.
So what on earth is it going to do with
NOTE CONF
two strings.
So if we run that we're going to see oh
NOTE CONF
it's at 1:00 already okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Sorry everyone.
I totally ran out of time.
NOTE CONF
I thought we had loads more time than that.
I'm really sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, we'll finish this lecture next time.
Um, but in the meantime, just email me if you
NOTE CONF
have any questions or come up.
I don't know how I lost track of time there.
NOTE CONF
That was really confusing.
Thanks very much for coming.
NOTE CONF
I'll see you on Thursday.
I feel like I don't deserve clapping for that time
NOTE CONF
misjudgement anyway.
So we do have a you can ask questions on
NOTE CONF
here if you want, but.
Or also just put them in piazza.
NOTE CONF